# stack, 3 types of ops, with details analysis. [Python]

> Source: [317878](https://leetcode.com/problems/brace-expansion-ii/discuss/317878/stack-3-types-of-ops-with-details-analysis-python)
>
> Created at: 2019-06-23 08:23:41
>
> Updated at: 2019-06-23 18:09:37

----

This is simply like parsing a math expression with plus (`+`), multplication (`*`) and parenthesis(`()`). 

In a math expression, `()` has the highest precedence, then `*`, and `+` has the lowest precedence.
In this question\'s expressions, `{}` has the highest precedence, then the invisible operation concating two adjacent expressions (i.e. `R(e_1 + e_2)`), and `,` has the lowest precedence.

`R(e_1 + e_2)` corresponds to mathematical multiplication
`R(e_1,e_2)` corresponds to mathematical summation
`R({...})` corresponds to mathematiacal `(...)`

Let\'s try to solve this problem acording the precedence of the operations.
- We know the `,` operation must always be in a `{...}`. So we need to handle the `,` operation when and only when we see the `}` token. With the assumption of both `e_1` and `e_2` have been well computed respectively, we can easily compute `e_1,e_2`.
- If we see the `R(e_1 + e_2)` operation, it would be great if we can assume the `e_1` and `e_2` have been well computed respectively. With this assumption, since the `R(e_1 + e_2)` operation is invisible in the input string, so we try to detect it for every char taken from the input, and conduct this operation when detected.
- If we see a `}`, we are conducting the highest-preceding operation. This means everything between this `}` and its paired `{` shoud be & can be blind to the outsiders (i.e. everyting out of the `{...}`). So it would be great if we can assume everything in the `{...}` has been well computed.


Don\'t worry if you feel we\'ve made too many assumptions. Observe that a basic letter as an expression doesn\'t conflict with any of the assumptions. The above analysis of the three types of operations tells us that if the assumptions are true for the sub-expressions, then the result of any of the three operations will still comply with the assumptions. So the assumptions are valid and self-contained.

The following Python code comes from the above analysis. In the code, we use `set` to denote a well-computed expression:
```
class Solution(object):
    def braceExpansionII(self, exp):
        stack = []
        for c in exp:
            if c == \'{\':
                stack.append(\'{\')
            elif c == \'}\':
                while stack[-2] == \',\':
                    set2 = stack.pop()
                    stack.pop()
                    stack[-1].update(set2)
                assert(stack[-2] == \'{\')
                tail = stack.pop()
                stack[-1] = tail
            elif c == \',\':
                stack.append(\',\')
            else:
                stack.append(set(c))
            while len(stack) > 1 and isinstance(stack[-1], set) and isinstance(stack[-2], set):
                set2 = stack.pop()
                set1 = stack.pop()
                stack.append(set(w1 + w2 for w1 in set1 for w2 in set2))
        assert(len(stack) == 1)
        return list(sorted(stack[-1]))
```