# 【O(n^2 log(n)) solution】Starting from brute-force, improve by memoization

> Source: [377531](https://leetcode.com/problems/make-array-strictly-increasing/discuss/377531/on2-logn-solution-starting-from-brute-force-improve-by-memoization)
>
> Created at: 2019-09-08 05:46:34
>
> Updated at: 2019-09-10 16:20:52

----

Define `num`: the current number in arr1 we are visiting.
Define `left`: the number left to the `num` in arr1.
Define `bigger`: the least one of those numbers in arr2 that are strictly greater than `left`.

eg:
```
arr1 = {3, 4, 7, 5, 8}
sorted arr2 = {1, 2, 6, 9, 10}
```
if `num=5`, then `left=7`, `bigger=9`.

---

### **Preparation: sort arr2 and use binary serarch**

For a given `num`, how to find `bigger` efficiently? We can first sort arr2, then binary-search `left` in arr2 and get the least number strictly greater than `left`, in O(lg(arr2.length)) time.

Why/when do we want to find `bigger`? Whenever we know we have to replace the `num` because `left >= num`, we have perhaps multiple choices to choose from arr2. We will anyway cost one replacement. So choosing the least possible one won\'t be worse than choosing the other possible numbers from arr2. ("worse" in terms of the total number of replacements.)

---

### **Brute force**

The brute force solution will be using backtracking algorithm.

Scanning arr1 from left to right, visiting `num`. Suppose when we\'ve scanned to `num`, all numbers left to `num` are already strictly increasing. Now, speaking of `num`, there are two possible cases can happen: `left < num` :), or `left >= num` which breaks the monotonic condition :(.

#### Case 1. `left < num`

We know `left < num` satisfies the monotonic constraint. But don\'t be happey too early. Our goal is not to create an arbitrary array that satisfies the monotonic constraint. Our goal is to use the least number of replacements to achieve that. So we still have two branches for the next step of search:
- Condition 1: Do not replace `num`. Scan rightward to visit the next number in arr1 and continue.
- Condition 2: Replace `num` with `bigger`. Scan rightward to visit the next number in arr1 and continue.

Each search of the two respectively gives us the least number of replacements needed to make all numbers right to `num` monotonic. Define: `res1` be the least number of replacements needed for condition 1, and `res2` for condition 2. Then we know `min(res1, res2 + 1)`. `min(res1, res2 + 1)` is the least number of replacements needed to make `num` and numbers right to `num` monotonic. The `+1` is because condition 2 replaces `num` with `bigger`, and that `+1` a replacement.

When both condition 1 & 2 can\'t make the rest of numbers monotonic, then we say "sorry, i can\'t make `num` and the rest numbers monotonic." So we have to **backtrack**.

#### Case 2. `left >= num`

Then we have to replace `num` with `bigger`. This is basically the condition 2 above.

With the above analysis, we can come up with a brute-force solution that is doing backtracking. But the time complexity is too high. Each visit of a `num` may potentionally cause two branches of subqueries.

---

### **Improve by memoization**
We may have to do the query multiple times: "when I am visiting `num`,  observing `left`, what is the least number of replacements needed to make `num` and all numbers right to `num` monotonic?" Let\'s cache the query result. In the following code, the `attempt` function is doing the query. `index` implys `num`;  `must_strictly_bigger_than` is `left` and implies `bigger`. ("implies" means you need to do some trivial computation to get what you want.)

For those are not familiar with Python3, `@functools.lru_cache(None)` does the cache trick. It caches `attempt(index, must_strictly_bigger_than)`\'s result, and will return the result of `attempt` immediately if it\'s been cacluated before for the given input.

---

### **Python code**

```
import bisect, functools
class Solution:
    def makeArrayIncreasing(self, arr1: List[int], arr2: List[int]) -> int:
        arr2 = sorted(set(arr2))
        
        def getSlightlyStrightlyBigger(n):
            index = bisect.bisect_right(arr2, n)
            if index == len(arr2):
                return None
            return arr2[index]
        
        @functools.lru_cache(None)
        def attempt(index, must_strictly_bigger_than):
            if index == len(arr1):
                return 0
            if arr1[index] > must_strictly_bigger_than:
                res1 = attempt(index + 1, arr1[index])
            else:
                res1 = float(\'inf\')
            bigger = getSlightlyStrightlyBigger(must_strictly_bigger_than)
            if bigger is None:
                res2 = float(\'inf\')
            else:
                res2 = attempt(index + 1, bigger)
            return min(res1, res2 + 1)
                
        res = attempt(0, float(\'-inf\'))
        return res if res != float(\'inf\') else -1
```

---

### **Time & space complexity**
Define n = max(arr1.length, arr2.length)

When calling `attempt(index, left)`, consider the possible arguments. There are `arr1.length` many choices for `index`, and at most `arr1.length` many choices for `left` for each given `index`. So there will be at most `n * n` many different values for the pair `(index, left)`.

So the space complexity is `O(n^2)`.

Each call of `attempt` may trigger a binary search over arr2. So the total overall time complexity is `O(n^2 log n)`.