# DFS detailed explanation, O(|E|) solution

> Source: [382638](https://leetcode.com/problems/critical-connections-in-a-network/discuss/382638/dfs-detailed-explanation-oe-solution)
>
> Created at: 2019-09-15 08:36:18
>
> Updated at: 2020-06-28 00:27:57

----

## **First thought**

Thiking for a little while, you will easily find out this theorem on a connected graph:

* **An edge is a critical connection, if and only if it is not in a cycle.**

So, if we know how to find cycles, and discard all edges in the cycles, then the remaining connections are a complete collection of critical connections.

----

## **How to find eges in cycles, and remove them**

We will use DFS algorithm to find cycles and decide whether or not an edge is in a cycle.

Define **rank** of a node: The depth of a node during a DFS. The starting node has a *rank* 0.

Only the nodes on the current DFS path have non-special *ranks*. In other words, only the nodes that we\'ve started visiting, but haven\'t finished visiting, have *ranks*. So `0 <= rank < n`.

(For coding purpose, if a node is not visited yet, it has a special rank `-2`; if we\'ve fully completed the visit of a node, it has a special rank `n`.)

**How can "rank" help us with removing cycles?** Imagine you have a current path of length `k` during a DFS. The nodes on the path has increasing ranks from `0` to `k`and incrementing by `1`. Surprisingly, your next visit finds a node that has a rank of `p` where `0 <= p < k`. Why does it happen? Aha! You found a node that is on the current search path! That means, congratulations, you found a cycle!

But only the current level of search knows it finds a cycle. How does the upper level of search knows, if you backtrack? Let\'s make use of the return value of DFS: **`dfs` function returns the minimum rank it finds.** During a step of search from node `u` to its neighbor `v`, **if `dfs(v)` returns something smaller than or equal to `rank(u)`**, then `u` knows its neighbor `v` helped it to find a cycle back to `u` or `u`\'s ancestor. So `u` knows it should discard the edge `(u, v)` which is in a cycle.

After doing dfs on all nodes, all edges in cycles are discarded. So the remaining edges are critical connections.

----

## **Python code**

```
import collections
class Solution(object):
    def criticalConnections(self, n, connections):
        def makeGraph(connections):
            graph = collections.defaultdict(list)
            for conn in connections:
                graph[conn[0]].append(conn[1])
                graph[conn[1]].append(conn[0])
            return graph

        graph = makeGraph(connections)
        connections = set(map(tuple, (map(sorted, connections))))
        rank = [-2] * n

        def dfs(node, depth):
            if rank[node] >= 0:
                # visiting (0<=rank<n), or visited (rank=n)
                return rank[node]
            rank[node] = depth
            min_back_depth = n
            for neighbor in graph[node]:
                if rank[neighbor] == depth - 1:
                    continue  # don\'t immmediately go back to parent. that\'s why i didn\'t choose -1 as the special value, in case depth==0.
                back_depth = dfs(neighbor, depth + 1)
                if back_depth <= depth:
                    connections.discard(tuple(sorted((node, neighbor))))
                min_back_depth = min(min_back_depth, back_depth)
            rank[node] = n  # this line is not necessary. see the "brain teaser" section below
            return min_back_depth
            
        dfs(0, 0)  # since this is a connected graph, we don\'t have to loop over all nodes.
        return list(connections)
```

----

## **Complexity analysis**
DFS time complexity is O(|E| + |V|), attempting to visit each edge at most twice. (the second attempt will immediately return.)
As the graph is always a connected graph, |E| >= |V|.

So, time complexity = O(|E|).

Space complexity = O(graph) + O(rank) + O(connections) = 3 * O(|E| + |V|) = O(|E|).

----

## **FAQ: Are you reinventing Tarjan?**
Honestly, I didn\'t know Tarjan beforehand. The idea of using `rank` is inspired by [preordering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Depth-first_search#Vertex_orderings) which is a basic concept of DFS. Now I realize they are similar, but there are still major differences between them.

* This solution uses only one array `rank`. While Tarjan uses two arrays: `dfn` and `low`.
* This solution\'s `min_back_depth` is similar to Tarjan\'s `low`, but `rank` is very different than `dfn`. `max(dfn)` is always n-1, while `max(rank)` could be smaller than n-1.
* This solution construsts the result by removing non-critical edges **during** the dfs, while Tarjan constructs the result by collecting non-critical edges **after** the dfs.
* In this solution, only nodes actively in the current search path have `0<=rank[node]<n`; while in Tarjan, nodes not actively in the current search path may still have `0<=dfn[node]<=low[node]<n`.

----

## **Brain teaser**

Thanks [@migfulcrum](https://leetcode.com/migfulcrum) for [pointing out](https://leetcode.com/discuss/comment/359567) that `rank[node] = n` is not necessary. He is totally right. I\'ll leave this as a brain teaser for you: why is it not necessary?
(Hint: after we\'ve finished visiting a node, is it possible to have another search path attempting to visit this node again?)

----

(If you like this post, don\'t forget to vote up so more people will read it!)