# 【Proof without math】Three tiny stories

> Source: [420455](https://leetcode.com/problems/airplane-seat-assignment-probability/discuss/420455/proof-without-math-three-tiny-stories)
>
> Created at: 2019-11-04 05:23:33
>
> Updated at: 2019-11-04 05:25:51

----

Let\'s say the first passenger\'s name is Trump.

In the last passenger\'s view, if his seat is taken, he doesn\'t care who takes his seat. He only cares whether his seat is taken.

Therefore, until the last person is on board, in terms of whether the last person\'s seat is taken, the following stories have the same probability of the seat being taken:

* The original story. if a passenger\'s seat is taken, randomly pick an untaken one.
* If a passenger finds his/her seat taken, he/she rudely extrudes the person on the seat. And the extruded person has to randomly pick an empty seat again. Obviously, in this scenario, Trump is the only person being extruded (maybe again and again). This won\'t change the final probability, because whoever being extruded must randomly pick a seat. So it doesn\'t matter who is extruded. Trump, or the ticket holder, it doesn\'t matter. So let\'s make Trump always be extruded.
* As long as Trump picks the seat that doesn\'t belong to him, he will be extruded. All ticket holders (except the last passenger) will always sit on their own seats. So it doesn\'t change the final probability if we change the boarding order into: the `n - 2` ticket holders -> Trump -> the last passenger.

In the thrid scenario, When Trump is boarding, he can randomly choose a seat from the remaining two seats. So when the last passenger is boarding, the probability that his seat is taken is 1/2.