# Proof: Why greedy works?

> Source: [238683](https://leetcode.com/problems/minimum-number-of-k-consecutive-bit-flips/discuss/238683/proof-why-greedy-works)
>
> Created at: 2019-02-17 05:38:34
>
> Updated at: 2020-10-05 16:20:45

----

## Greedy claim

- before and after any flip, any bit in the sequence of 1 starting from the left-most bit should not be flipped anymore.

---
## Proof by contradiction:

The _greedy claim_ gives a solution `S`. Without loss of generality, let the i-th bit be the first 0 bit. Suppose the _greedy claim_ above is false, then there must be a better (better means less flips) solution `S\'` in which bits in range `[J , J + K - 1]` are flipped and `J < i`. There could be multiple `J`. Let `j` be the smallest possible `J`. Since `A[j]` now is 1 (why? because `j<i`), if we flip it, `A[j]` becomes 0. `A[j]` finally should be 1, so `S\'` must flips `A[j]` again sometime later. As `j` is the smallest of `J`, `S\'` can\'t flip anything left to `A[j]`, which means only flipping the range `[j , j + K - 1]` can flip `A[j]` back to 1. See? we flipped `[j , j + K - 1]`, then again `[j , j + K - 1]`. `S\'` wasts flips. If `S\'` exists, we can find a third solution `S\'\'` that is strictly even better than `S\'`. And we can do this induction infinitely and find a solution needs only 0 or even negative number of flips. -- That is of course impossible. Actually, the induction of finding even better solutions will eventually give you `S`. `S` is strictly better than `S`? Of course not!
-- So the _greedy claim_ above is NOT false.
So, the _greedy claim_ is true.


---
## OK...I know I shouldn\'t flip the left-most 1s. What should I flip next?
So everything left to the i-th bit should not be flipped. But `A[i]` now is 0. `S` will flip it to 1 sometime. Since from then on `S` can\'t flip anything left to `A[i]`, it must flip `A[i...i + K - 1]` to flip `A[i]`.